README.md, before:

# Benchmark of uint128

In this repository you can run benchmark for following uint128 implementations:
- GCC builtin unsigned __int128
- LLVM builtin unsigned _BitInt(128)
- chfast intx::uint128
- abseil absl::uint128
- boost::multiprecision::uint128

# Requirements

1. Google Benchmark should be installed according to https://github.com/google/benchmark#installation
2. Boost includes installed
3. (Optionally) If you want to use LLVM, install at least clang-16


# How to run benchmark?

```
git clone https://github.com/mikelik/int128-benchmark.git
cd int128-benchmark
git submodule update --init  --recursive
mkdir build
cd build
# Optionally if you want to use LLVM - uncomment two below lines
# export CC=/usr/bin/clang
# export CXX=/usr/bin/clang++
cmake ..
make
taskset -c 0 ./int128-benchmark
```

To reduce variation follow steps from https://github.com/google/benchmark/blob/main/docs/reducing_variance.md#reducing-variance-in-benchmarks

# Example output for GCC

```
$ taskset -c 0 ./int128-benchmark 
2023-06-15T09:46:31+02:00
Running ./int128-benchmark
Run on (20 X 4600 MHz CPU s)
CPU Caches:
  L1 Data 48 KiB (x10)
  L1 Instruction 32 KiB (x10)
  L2 Unified 1280 KiB (x10)
  L3 Unified 24576 KiB (x1)
Load Average: 1.93, 1.47, 0.90
***WARNING*** CPU scaling is enabled, the benchmark real time measurements may be noisy and will incur extra overhead.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Benchmark                                                      Time             CPU   Iterations
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
create_type< boost::multiprecision::uint128_t >            0.658 ns        0.658 ns   1000000000
create_type< intx::uint128 >                               0.658 ns        0.658 ns   1000000000
create_type< absl::uint128 >                               0.657 ns        0.657 ns   1000000000
create_type< unsigned __int128>                            0.656 ns        0.656 ns   1000000000
add_type< boost::multiprecision::uint128_t >                13.2 ns         13.2 ns     52938826
add_type< intx::uint128 >                                   16.8 ns         16.8 ns     42118742
add_type< absl::uint128 >                                   7.10 ns         7.10 ns     97035886
add_type< unsigned __int128>                                1.74 ns         1.74 ns    400531400
multiply_type< boost::multiprecision::uint128_t >           13.1 ns         13.1 ns     53095995
multiply_type< intx::uint128 >                              15.2 ns         15.2 ns     45782580
multiply_type< absl::uint128 >                              7.41 ns         7.41 ns     93341554
multiply_type< unsigned __int128>                           1.97 ns         1.97 ns    354164013
add_multiply_type< boost::multiprecision::uint128_t >       29.6 ns         29.6 ns     23458579
add_multiply_type< intx::uint128 >                          28.0 ns         28.0 ns     24805161
add_multiply_type< absl::uint128 >                          11.9 ns         11.9 ns     58560456
add_multiply_type< unsigned __int128>                       1.68 ns         1.68 ns    418555225
```

# Example output for LLVM

```
$  taskset -c 0 ./int128-benchmark 
2023-06-15T10:12:03+02:00
Running ./int128-benchmark
Run on (20 X 4600 MHz CPU s)
CPU Caches:
  L1 Data 48 KiB (x10)
  L1 Instruction 32 KiB (x10)
  L2 Unified 1280 KiB (x10)
  L3 Unified 24576 KiB (x1)
Load Average: 1.98, 1.11, 0.92
***WARNING*** CPU scaling is enabled, the benchmark real time measurements may be noisy and will incur extra overhead.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Benchmark                                                      Time             CPU   Iterations
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
create_type< boost::multiprecision::uint128_t >             4.39 ns         4.39 ns    159309462
create_type< intx::uint128 >                                1.98 ns         1.98 ns    351136279
create_type< absl::uint128 >                                1.53 ns         1.53 ns    456044553
create_type< unsigned __int128>                             1.54 ns         1.54 ns    455192807
create_type< unsigned _BitInt(128) >                        1.53 ns         1.53 ns    453769212
add_type< boost::multiprecision::uint128_t >                11.8 ns         11.8 ns     59040198
add_type< intx::uint128 >                                   19.7 ns         19.7 ns     35467171
add_type< absl::uint128 >                                   8.06 ns         8.06 ns     86876982
add_type< unsigned __int128>                                1.53 ns         1.53 ns    455288456
add_type< unsigned _BitInt(128) >                           1.53 ns         1.53 ns    456311686
multiply_type< boost::multiprecision::uint128_t >           12.1 ns         12.1 ns     58205575
multiply_type< intx::uint128 >                              14.6 ns         14.6 ns     47376566
multiply_type< absl::uint128 >                              8.20 ns         8.20 ns     85523932
multiply_type< unsigned __int128>                           1.53 ns         1.53 ns    451265094
multiply_type< unsigned _BitInt(128) >                      1.54 ns         1.54 ns    455370936
add_multiply_type< boost::multiprecision::uint128_t >       28.3 ns         28.3 ns     24796175
add_multiply_type< intx::uint128 >                          33.1 ns         33.1 ns     21088193
add_multiply_type< absl::uint128 >                          12.9 ns         12.9 ns     53713186
add_multiply_type< unsigned __int128>                       1.76 ns         1.76 ns    398268003
add_multiply_type< unsigned _BitInt(128) >                  1.75 ns         1.75 ns    399085583
```

# Results

The fastest are compiler builtins: either __int128 from GCC or _BitInt(128) from clang.
Recommended is _BitInt(128) as it will be included in C23 standard.

Commit message:

Add conversion with improved performance by 30%

README.md, after:

# Benchmark of uint128

In this repository you can run benchmark for following uint128 implementations:
- GCC builtin unsigned __int128
- LLVM builtin unsigned _BitInt(128)
- chfast intx::uint128
- abseil absl::uint128
- boost::multiprecision::uint128

# Requirements

1. Google Benchmark should be installed according to https://github.com/google/benchmark#installation
2. Boost includes installed
3. (Optionally) If you want to use LLVM, install at least clang-16


# How to run benchmark?

```
git clone https://github.com/mikelik/int128-benchmark.git
cd int128-benchmark
git submodule update --init  --recursive
mkdir build
cd build
# Optionally if you want to use LLVM - uncomment two below lines
# export CC=/usr/bin/clang
# export CXX=/usr/bin/clang++
cmake ..
make
taskset -c 0 ./int128-benchmark
```

To reduce variation follow steps from https://github.com/google/benchmark/blob/main/docs/reducing_variance.md#reducing-variance-in-benchmarks

# Example output for GCC

```
$ taskset -c 0 ./int128-benchmark 
2023-06-15T09:46:31+02:00
Running ./int128-benchmark
Run on (20 X 4600 MHz CPU s)
CPU Caches:
  L1 Data 48 KiB (x10)
  L1 Instruction 32 KiB (x10)
  L2 Unified 1280 KiB (x10)
  L3 Unified 24576 KiB (x1)
Load Average: 1.93, 1.47, 0.90
***WARNING*** CPU scaling is enabled, the benchmark real time measurements may be noisy and will incur extra overhead.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Benchmark                                                      Time             CPU   Iterations
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
create_type< boost::multiprecision::uint128_t >            0.658 ns        0.658 ns   1000000000
create_type< intx::uint128 >                               0.658 ns        0.658 ns   1000000000
create_type< absl::uint128 >                               0.657 ns        0.657 ns   1000000000
create_type< unsigned __int128>                            0.656 ns        0.656 ns   1000000000
add_type< boost::multiprecision::uint128_t >                13.2 ns         13.2 ns     52938826
add_type< intx::uint128 >                                   16.8 ns         16.8 ns     42118742
add_type< absl::uint128 >                                   7.10 ns         7.10 ns     97035886
add_type< unsigned __int128>                                1.74 ns         1.74 ns    400531400
multiply_type< boost::multiprecision::uint128_t >           13.1 ns         13.1 ns     53095995
multiply_type< intx::uint128 >                              15.2 ns         15.2 ns     45782580
multiply_type< absl::uint128 >                              7.41 ns         7.41 ns     93341554
multiply_type< unsigned __int128>                           1.97 ns         1.97 ns    354164013
add_multiply_type< boost::multiprecision::uint128_t >       29.6 ns         29.6 ns     23458579
add_multiply_type< intx::uint128 >                          28.0 ns         28.0 ns     24805161
add_multiply_type< absl::uint128 >                          11.9 ns         11.9 ns     58560456
add_multiply_type< unsigned __int128>                       1.68 ns         1.68 ns    418555225
```

# Example output for LLVM

```
$  taskset -c 0 ./int128-benchmark 
2023-06-15T10:12:03+02:00
Running ./int128-benchmark
Run on (20 X 4600 MHz CPU s)
CPU Caches:
  L1 Data 48 KiB (x10)
  L1 Instruction 32 KiB (x10)
  L2 Unified 1280 KiB (x10)
  L3 Unified 24576 KiB (x1)
Load Average: 1.98, 1.11, 0.92
***WARNING*** CPU scaling is enabled, the benchmark real time measurements may be noisy and will incur extra overhead.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Benchmark                                                      Time             CPU   Iterations
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
create_type< boost::multiprecision::uint128_t >             4.39 ns         4.39 ns    159309462
create_type< intx::uint128 >                                1.98 ns         1.98 ns    351136279
create_type< absl::uint128 >                                1.53 ns         1.53 ns    456044553
create_type< unsigned __int128>                             1.54 ns         1.54 ns    455192807
create_type< unsigned _BitInt(128) >                        1.53 ns         1.53 ns    453769212
add_type< boost::multiprecision::uint128_t >                11.8 ns         11.8 ns     59040198
add_type< intx::uint128 >                                   19.7 ns         19.7 ns     35467171
add_type< absl::uint128 >                                   8.06 ns         8.06 ns     86876982
add_type< unsigned __int128>                                1.53 ns         1.53 ns    455288456
add_type< unsigned _BitInt(128) >                           1.53 ns         1.53 ns    456311686
multiply_type< boost::multiprecision::uint128_t >           12.1 ns         12.1 ns     58205575
multiply_type< intx::uint128 >                              14.6 ns         14.6 ns     47376566
multiply_type< absl::uint128 >                              8.20 ns         8.20 ns     85523932
multiply_type< unsigned __int128>                           1.53 ns         1.53 ns    451265094
multiply_type< unsigned _BitInt(128) >                      1.54 ns         1.54 ns    455370936
add_multiply_type< boost::multiprecision::uint128_t >       28.3 ns         28.3 ns     24796175
add_multiply_type< intx::uint128 >                          33.1 ns         33.1 ns     21088193
add_multiply_type< absl::uint128 >                          12.9 ns         12.9 ns     53713186
add_multiply_type< unsigned __int128>                       1.76 ns         1.76 ns    398268003
add_multiply_type< unsigned _BitInt(128) >                  1.75 ns         1.75 ns    399085583
```
# Example output for LLVM hex conversion
```
$ ./hex-benchmark 
2023-06-21T15:41:31+02:00
Running ./hex-benchmark
Run on (20 X 4600 MHz CPU s)
CPU Caches:
  L1 Data 48 KiB (x10)
  L1 Instruction 32 KiB (x10)
  L2 Unified 1280 KiB (x10)
  L3 Unified 24576 KiB (x1)
Load Average: 0.55, 0.83, 0.89
***WARNING*** CPU scaling is enabled, the benchmark real time measurements may be noisy and will incur extra overhead.
-----------------------------------------------------
Benchmark           Time             CPU   Iterations
-----------------------------------------------------
to_string        1680 ns         1680 ns       408021
to_string2        173 ns          173 ns      4066233
to_string3        166 ns          166 ns      4151766
to_string4        145 ns          145 ns      4818316
to_string5       77.3 ns         77.3 ns      8924112
to_int            116 ns          116 ns      5993281
to_int2          66.6 ns         66.6 ns     10023861
to_int3           110 ns          110 ns      6372773
to_int4           105 ns          105 ns      6885775
```

# Results

The fastest are compiler builtins: either __int128 from GCC or _BitInt(128) from clang.
Recommended is _BitInt(128) as it will be included in C23 standard.
